Added updates for addresses (#1106)
semanticarts/gist: docs/AddressGuidance.md

> # New Patterns for Using gist:Address

Reviewer: @DanCarey404 @kchastain703 Our decision was to put this document into the `gist-doc` repo, and limit our documentation in the `gist` repo to migration information.

Reviewer: @DanCarey404 @kchastain703 I'm also not convinced that we need all this justification and comparison with the previous state here. This is not something we normally do, and it will be irrelevant to anyone who hasn't used gist12 or earlier. In the `gist-doc` documentation, I would just describe the model itself without justifying or explaining the changes relative to previous versions.

Author: @DanCarey404 is OOO until July 5th, so I'll be going through these. I believe he will still be checking Teams, though, so I'll try to take care of all that I can myself, and pass along daily only what most requires his input.

Author: Alright, so I should remove the AddressGuidance.md file completely from `gist/docs`, and create a new branch for it on `gist-doc`?

Reviewer 2: > Alright, so I should remove the AddressGuidance.md file completely from `gist/docs`, and create a new branch for it on `gist-doc`?

That seems to be the right thing to do.

Reviewer 2: @rjyounes 
> In the `gist-doc` documentation, I would just describe the model itself without justifying or explaining the changes relative to previous versions.

I see this differently. I find it very helpful when people explain what they are doing and why. I agree there should be a minimum of that in gist proper, but Im in favor of putting such details in gist-docs

The formal restriction definition for gist:PhysicalAddress is "gist:Address and (gist:refersTo some gist:Place)". In other words, a physical address exists in the real, physical world. It is possible for someone to go there and touch the address's referent.

The gist:ElectronicAddress class has no formal restriction definition. But it does have a text definition: _"_ _Content referring to a locatable virtual place not physically existing, as such, but made by software or electronics to appear to do so."_ From a practical perspective, it is an address which is not tangible. One cannot touch it. (One might touch the WI-FI router associated with an IP Address. But that is _not_ the address itself.)

### Using the new model

Now, our address-related triples can all conform to three basic patterns:
| | **subject class** | **predicate** | **object class/datatype** |
| -- | -- | -- | -- |
| **Pattern Set 1** | owl:Thing | gist:hasAddress | gist:PhysicalAddress |
| **Pattern Set 1** | owl:Thing | gist:hasAddress | gist:ElectronicAddress |
| **Pattern Set 2** | gist:PhysicalAddress | gist:containedText | xsd:string |

> | **Pattern Set 2** | gist:ElectronicAddress | gist:containedText | xsd:string |

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Duplicate line

Author: Fixed

| **Pattern Set 2** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:containedText | "1313 Mockingbird Ln, Munster, IN  46321" .|
| **Pattern Set 2** | ex:_ElectronicAddress_81321 | gist:containedText | "https://example/bigwebsite.html" . |
| **Pattern Set 2** | ex:_ElectronicAddress_jjones%40hotmail.com | gist:containedText | "jjones@hotmail.com" . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_GeoPoint_41.53281962240151_-87.49815865065672 . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_GovernedGeoRegion_MunsterIN . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_GovernedGeoRegion_IN . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_PostalZone_US_436121 . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_CountryGeoRegion_USA . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | gist:ElectronicAddress | gist:refersTo | <https://example/bigwebsite.html> . |

Especially in the case of electronic addresses, one should be careful not to confuse or conflate the _xsd:string_ object used in the "gist:containedText" triple with the _rdf:resource_ object used in the "gist:refersTo" triple.

> Beyond the physical/electronic distinction made by the classes, other important distinctions need to be made. One reasonably might ask, "Still, what _kind_ of address are we talking about?" These additional distinctions are to be handled using categories in the CBox.

Reviewer: Scratch the term "CBox." 
```suggestion
Beyond the physical/electronic distinction made by the classes, other important distinctions need to be made. One reasonably might ask, "Still, what _kind_ of address are we talking about?" These additional distinctions are to be handled using categories (i.e., instances of `gist:Category`).
```

We are no longer using the term "CBox."

### Address Categories & Instances

> gist v13.0.0 supplies three "starter" categories for distinguishing addresses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gist v13.0.0 supplies three "starter" category classes for distinguishing addresses.
```

- gist:\AddressUsageType
- gist:\ElectronicAddressType
- gist:\PhysicalAddressType .

> However, in keeping with our self-imposed rules around the gistCore ontology, we do not supply member instances of those classes as part of the gist release. But fear not. This document will provide some concrete suggestions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, in keeping with our self-imposed rules around the `gistCore` ontology, we do not define member instances of those classes. But fear not. This document will provide some concrete suggestions.
```

It's not just the release - it's the ontology itself - e.g., as sitting in GitHub.

Reviewer 2: @kchastain703 I'm assuming that you will commit these suggestions in due course as well as giving the thumbs up

Author: Yes, sorry, I was using the thumbs-up as  as checklist for myself, too.

> Every user will need to evaluate how best to categorize their address instances to suit their context. In many cases, this may be influenced by legacy system data. Often, there are implicit distinctions made, based on column names. Too often, there are more distinctions than are truly necessary, based upon old usage. The choice of categories and instances to implement in the knowledge graph should be given careful consideration, and not be chained to outdated or inappropriate concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every user will need to evaluate how best to categorize their address instances to suit their context. In many cases, this may be influenced by legacy system data. Often, there are implicit distinctions made based on column names. Too often, there are more distinctions than are truly necessary, based upon old usage. The choice of categories and instances to implement in the knowledge graph should be given careful consideration, and not be chained to outdated or inappropriate concepts.
```

> Below are some examples we recommend for consideration. (The instance IRIs should use the appropriate domain namespace, not _gist_'s or _example_'s.) But ultimately, the classes and instances must suit the user's particular context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are some examples we recommend for consideration. (The instance IRIs should use the appropriate domain namespace, not `gist:` or `ex:`.) But ultimately, the classes and instances must suit the user's particular context.
```

> In addition to the three classes provided within gistCore, we encourage adding ex:PrecedenceType to the domain ontology. In our experience, the combination of these four categories should cover most addresses.

Reviewer: This needs a bit of explanation to clarify what precedence means in this case.

#### gist:PhysicalAddressType

- ex:\_PhysicalAddressType_street
- ex:\_PhysicalAddressType_postal_drop (for PO Boxes, etc.)
- ex:\_PhysicalAddressType_fuzzy (e.g., "Corner of Main St & First Ave")

#### gist:ElectronicAddressType

- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_mobile_telephone
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_stationary_telephone
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_fax
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_email
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_web
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_ip (for Internet Protocol)
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_mac (for Medium Access Control)

#### gist:AddressUsageType

- ex:\_AddressUsageType_billing
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_business
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_personal
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_postal
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_residence

#### ex:PrecedenceType

- ex:\_PrecedenceType_primary
- ex:\_PrecedenceType_secondary
- ex:\_PrecedenceType_non_primary

## Temporal Addresses

> Rather than assigning an Address instance directly to a person or organization, it is almost certainly more correct to model addresses in a temporal relation with other things and assign the usage and precedence categories to the relationship instance. For example, a particular address might start out being used as _both_ a residence and a postal address. But at some point, the addressee decides to use something else as their postal address.

Reviewer: Add an example of what exactly this would look like.

You could also point out that, e.g., one person's billing address might be another's residence address.

## Other Considerations

### Use of gist:refersTo

> Because gist:Address and its subclasses are subclasses of gist:Content, it does not make semantic sense to say that an address "is contained in a georegion". However, it does make sense to say that the address "refers to something". That "something" can be a geo-point (with a very specific latitude & longitude), a city, state, or country, a postal zone, or some custom-defined area. Hence, we do not assign a range to the gist:refersTo property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because `gist:Address` and its subclasses are subclasses of `gist:Content`, it does not make semantic sense to say that an address "is contained in a georegion". However, it does make sense to say that the address "refers to something". That "something" can be a geo-point (with a very specific latitude & longitude), a city, state, or country, a postal zone, or some custom-defined area. Hence, we do not assign a range to the gist:refersTo property (and it can be used outside the context of addresses as well).
```

In the case of some electronic address types (e.g., email addresses), one might choose not to use the gist:references property, at all.

### Address Segments

As noted above, many data models parse physical address strings into their component parts. In the US, this is typically one or two street components for the building and street, one each for the city, state, and postal code. But that pattern is too restrictive for physical addresses internationally. Some countries use very different patterns for physical addresses.

More to the point, many applications simply do not _require_ a parsed address. Consequently, much effort goes into stitching the components back together in some consistent fashion. Hence our recommendation to treat addresses as a single string, using the gist:containedText property.

If, however, the situation calls for such parsed address strings within the knowledge graph, one can expand upon gist, including the necessary subclasses within the user's namespace. E.g., ex:streetText, ex:cityText, ex:regionText, ex:postalCodeText.

### Ex uno, multi? (Out of one, many?)

> There are arguments for and against treating typographical variants of an address (e.g., _"Street"_ vs "_St"_, _"Avenue"_ vs _"Ave"_) as different individuals and assigning them different IRIs. The decision of which paradigm to employ must be decided with each new ontology and knowledge graph. Semantic Arts makes no recommendation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are arguments for and against treating typographical variants of an address (e.g., _"Street"_ vs "_St"_, _"Avenue"_ vs _"Ave"_) as different individuals and assigning them different IRIs, or perhaps using the same `Address` object with multiple `containedText` values. The decision of which paradigm to employ must be decided with each new ontology and knowledge graph. Semantic Arts makes no recommendation.
```

# New Patterns for Using gist:Address

In gist v13.0.0, we introduced a new paradigm for modeling addresses. The new method is simpler and should result in more consistent instance data.

## Background

As recently as gist 12.1.0, we had five subclasses of gist:Address: 

> - gist:\ElectronicMessageAddress

Reviewer: Here and throughout, there is a problem with backslashes.

```suggestion
- gist:ElectronicMessageAddress
```

Author: These should all be fixed now

- gist:\EmailAddress
- gist:\PostalAddress
- gist:\StreetAddress
- gist:\TelephoneNumber .

And we had two properties specifically aimed at addresses:
- gist:\hasAddress
- gist:\hasCommunicationAddress

But these classes and properties pre-dated our adoption of the catgories (CBox) paradigm. Further, it is not always possible to know at the time of minting the instances what _kind_ of address is being represented. Is it a Postal Address or a Street Address? If it is both, with what midfix should the IRI be minted?

Upon analysis, we decided these classes were not semantically dissimilar enough to warrant their existence as classes.

## The New Model

With gist v13.0.0, we reduced gist:Address down to two disjoint subclasses:
- gist:\Address
  - gist:\ElectronicAddress
  - gist:\PhysicalAddress .
And we removed gist:hasCommunicationAddress and we added a new object property, gist:refersTo.

> The formal restriction definition for gist:PhysicalAddress is "gist:Address and (gist:refersTo some gist:Place)". In other words, a physical address exists in the real, physical world. It is possible for someone to go there and touch the address's referent.

Author: Fixed

> The gist:ElectronicAddress class has no formal restriction definition. But it does have a text definition: _"_ _Content referring to a locatable virtual place not physically existing, as such, but made by software or electronics to appear to do so."_ From a practical perspective, it is an address which is not tangible. One cannot touch it. (One might touch the WI-FI router associated with your IP Address. But that is _not_ the address itself.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `gist:ElectronicAddress` class has no formal restriction definition. But it does have a text definition: _"_ _Content referring to a locatable virtual place not physically existing, as such, but made by software or electronics to appear to do so."_ From a practical perspective, it is an address which is not tangible. One cannot touch it. (One might touch the WI-FI router associated with your IP Address. But that is _not_ the address itself.)

| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_GovernedGeoRegion_IN . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_PostalZone_US_436121 . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | ex:_PhysicalAddress_11235 | gist:refersTo | ex:_CountryGeoRegion_USA . |
| **Pattern Set 3** | gist:ElectronicAddress | gist:refersTo | <https://example/bigwebsite.html> . |

Especially in the case of electronic addresses, one should be careful not to confuse or conflate the _xsd:string_ object used in the "gist:containedText" triple with the _rdf:resource_ object used in the "gist:refersTo" triple.

Beyond the physical/electronic distinction made by the classes, other important distinctions need to be made. One reasonably might ask, "Still, what _kind_ of address are we talking about?" These additional distinctions are to be handled using categories in the CBox.

### Address Categories & Instances

gist v13.0.0 supplies four "starter" categories for distinguishing addresses.
- gist:\AddressUsageType
- gist:\ElectronicAddressType
- gist:\PhysicalAddressType 
- gist:\PrecedenceType .

> 

Reviewer 2: PrecedenceType is NOT in the ontology. Either put it in or remove this bullet.

In addition to the three classes provided within gistCore, we encourage you to consider adding ex:PrecedenceType to your domain ontology. In our experience, the combination of these four categories should cover most addresses.

#### gist:PhysicalAddressType

- ex:\_PhysicalAddressType_street
- ex:\_PhysicalAddressType_postal_drop (for PO Boxes, etc.)
- ex:\_PhysicalAddressType_fuzzy (e.g., "Corner of Main St & First Ave")

#### gist:ElectronicAddressType

- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_mobile_telephone
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_stationary_telephone
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_fax
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_email
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_web
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_ip (for Internet Protocol)
- ex:\_ElectronicAddressType_mac (for Medium Access Control)

#### gist:AddressUsageType

- ex:\_AddressUsageType_billing
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_business
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_personal
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_postal
- ex:\_AddressUsageType_residence

#### gist:PrecedenceType

- ex:\_PrecedenceType_primary
- ex:\_PrecedenceType_secondary

> - ex:\_PrecedenceType_non_primary

Reviewer 2: PrecedenceType is NOT in the ontology.

Author: Do you think we should add this in as `PrecedenceType` or as `AddressPrecedenceType`?

Author: Oh, Dan's further recommendation is to add `PrecedenceType` in the domain ontology:
> In addition to the three classes provided within gistCore, we encourage adding ex:PrecedenceType to the domain ontology. In our experience, the combination of these four categories should cover most addresses.

Reviewer 2: > Do you think we should add this in as `PrecedenceType` or as `AddressPrecedenceType`?

Hmm, good question.  Not sure. THere could be more than one variation of precendence type, address just being one. Lets leave it for now as PrecedenceType, since its generic, more appropriately for gist.

Also, an address can refer to multiple things, using multiple triples. This is perhaps what people really have in mind when they want an address string split into its component parts. But parsing a string just results in multiple strings. Determining what _actual things_ an address refers to, and using the IRIs for those things, results in much more useful information. So, let the address instance refer to the IRIs for as many things as are useful in the domain's context.

An important point to bear in mind is that an address string might not _explicitly_ refer to a country (e.g., "1313 Mockingbird Ln, Munster, IN"). But it _implicitly_ refers to it. In the example, the address implies the USA because Indiana is part of the US. So, it is perfectly acceptable to have a triple asserting that the address refers to the IRI for the country, even when the address string lacks it.

> In the case of some electronic address types (e.g., email addresses), one might choose not to use the gist:references property, at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of some electronic address types (e.g., email addresses), one might choose not to use the `gist:refersTo` property, at all.

Reviewer: Well, one might always choose _not_ to use `gist:refersTo` at all - there are many use cases that won't call for it, which I would point out. You might say that there are some types of addresses (e.g., email addresses) that don't necessarily refer to anything.

Author: Updated
